src/nectarchain/dqm/vm/README.md, before:

# How to setup a cloud VM with a DB for DQM

These notes are meant to admins deploying a Bokeh service to display NectarCAM DQM results through a web app.

Two virtual machines (VM) should be created:
* one with read/write access to a ZODB data base (the _primary_ host);
* another one with a replicated, read-only data base using `zc.zrs` (the _secondary_ host).

## Primary VM, with read/write database

Create a cloud VM using the `cloud-init` configuration file `dqm-web-app-rw_cloud-init.yml` provided in this directory. It is assumed to be based on a Debian/Ubuntu image.

You will first need to adjust the password hash and SSH public key to be used to create the `nectarcam` user therein.

A Docker container with a ZODB/ZEO server with `zc.zrs` replication enabled on port 5000 will automatically be created and launched within the VM.

The database can then be directly fed using the DQM starting script `start_calib.py`, which writes on the local data base deployed with ZEO on `localhost`.

## Secondary, read-only data base VM

Create another cloud VM using the `cloud-init` configuration file `dqm-web-app-ro_cloud-init.yml` provided in this directory. It is also assumed to be based on a Debian/Ubuntu image. 

Here also, you will first need to adjust the password hash and SSH public key to be used to create the `nectarcam` user therein. You will also need to provide the internal IP address of the primary host we created just before, for the secondary to know which host the ZODB database has to be replicated from.

Any attempt to write in the database on the secondary host will rightfully result in a `ZODB.POSException.ReadOnlyError` error.

## That's it!

Congrats! You now have two VMs with ZODB/ZEO servers with ZRS replication enabled, with:
* a primary serving as read/write database;
* a secondary, replicated from the primary, and serving the database read-only, to be used for the Bokeh web application.

## Launching the web app

The Bokeh service is launched from the second VM (the one hosting the secondary, read-only database) with:
```shell
bokeh serve --num-procs $(grep -c ^processor /proc/cpuinfo) \
            --show bokeh_app.py
```
and served on `localhost` on port 5006.

Then, make sure with your local IT team that `<SECONDARY_HOST_IP_ADDRESS>:5006/bokeh_app` is visible from the web.

## How to back the database up ?

Backups of the DQM ZODB database can be created, from the _primary_ VM, with (cf. e.g. https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/#back-up-a-volume):

```shell
docker run --rm --volumes-from plone-zeo-db-1 -v $(pwd):/backup ubuntu tar zcf /backup/zodb.tar.gz /data
```
Such a backup can then be fed into a new production VM with:
```shell
docker run -v $(pwd):/backup plone-zeo-db-1 bash -c "cd /data && tar xvf /backup/zodb.tar.gz --strip 1"
```

##  TODO

* Open the access of the web app worldwide, protected with NectarCAM user/password.
* Open write access to the DB for worker nodes on DIRAC, presumably using temporary, volatile tokens.

Commit message:

Bind only one IP address for Plone backend and ZRS replication.

src/nectarchain/dqm/vm/README.md, after:

# How to setup a cloud VM with a DB for DQM

These notes are meant to admins deploying a Bokeh service to display NectarCAM DQM results through a web app.

Two virtual machines (VM) should be created:
* one with read/write access to a ZODB data base (the _primary_ host);
* another one with a replicated, read-only data base using `zc.zrs` (the _secondary_ host).

## Primary VM, with read/write database

Create a cloud VM using the `cloud-init` configuration file `dqm-web-app-rw_cloud-init.yml` provided in this directory. It is assumed to be based on a Debian/Ubuntu image.

You will first need to adjust the password hash and SSH public key to be used to create the `nectarcam` user therein. You will also need to provide the IP address of a known server which will be the only one allowed to connect to the Plone backend for user management.

A Docker container with a ZODB/ZEO server with `zc.zrs` replication enabled on port 5000 will automatically be created and launched within the VM.

The database can then be directly fed using the DQM starting script `start_calib.py`, which writes on the local data base deployed with ZEO on `localhost`.

## Secondary, read-only data base VM

Create another cloud VM using the `cloud-init` configuration file `dqm-web-app-ro_cloud-init.yml` provided in this directory. It is also assumed to be based on a Debian/Ubuntu image. 

Here also, you will first need to adjust the password hash and SSH public key to be used to create the `nectarcam` user therein. You will also need to provide the internal IP address of the primary host we created just before, for the secondary to know which host the ZODB database has to be replicated from.

Any attempt to write in the database on the secondary host will rightfully result in a `ZODB.POSException.ReadOnlyError` error.

## That's it!

Congrats! You now have two VMs with ZODB/ZEO servers with ZRS replication enabled, with:
* a primary serving as read/write database;
* a secondary, replicated from the primary, and serving the database read-only, to be used for the Bokeh web application.

## Launching the web app

The Bokeh service is launched from the second VM (the one hosting the secondary, read-only database) with:
```shell
bokeh serve --num-procs $(grep -c ^processor /proc/cpuinfo) \
            --show bokeh_app.py
```
and served on `localhost` on port 5006.

Then, make sure with your local IT team that `<SECONDARY_HOST_IP_ADDRESS>:5006/bokeh_app` is visible from the web.

## How to back the database up ?

Backups of the DQM ZODB database can be created, from the _primary_ VM, with (cf. e.g. https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/#back-up-a-volume):

```shell
docker run --rm --volumes-from plone-zeo-db-1 -v $(pwd):/backup ubuntu tar zcf /backup/zodb.tar.gz /data
```
Such a backup can then be fed into a new production VM with:
```shell
docker run -v $(pwd):/backup plone-zeo-db-1 bash -c "cd /data && tar xvf /backup/zodb.tar.gz --strip 1"
```

##  TODO

* Open the access of the web app worldwide, protected with NectarCAM user/password.
* Open write access to the DB for worker nodes on DIRAC, presumably using temporary, volatile tokens.
